---
title: 'Deep Survival Analysis in Multimodal Medical Data: A Parametric and Probabilistic
  Approach with Competing Risks'
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2025-10-07-samvae
date: 2025-10-07
venue: ArXiv
paperurl: /files/2025-10-07-samvae.pdf
link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.07804
citation: 'Garrido, A., Almodóvar, A., Apellániz, P. A., Parras, J., & Zazo, S. (2025).
  Deep Survival Analysis in Multimodal Medical Data: A Parametric and Probabilistic
  Approach with Competing Risks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07804.'
authors: Alba Garrido, Alejandro Almodóvar, Patricia A. Apellániz, Juan Parras, Santiago
  Zazo
pub_type: preprint
topics:
- Survival Analysis
- Multimodal Data
- Healthcare
featured: false
---

Accurate survival prediction is critical in oncology for prognosis and treatment planning. Traditional approaches often rely on a single data modality, limiting their ability to capture the complexity of tumor biology. To address this challenge, we introduce a multimodal deep learning framework for survival analysis capable of modeling both single and competing risks scenarios, evaluating the impact of integrating multiple medical data sources on survival predictions. We propose SAMVAE (Survival Analysis Multimodal Variational Autoencoder), a novel deep learning architecture designed for survival prediction that integrates six data modalities: clinical variables, four molecular profiles, and histopathological images. SAMVAE leverages modality specific encoders to project inputs into a shared latent space, enabling robust survival prediction while preserving modality specific information. Its parametric formulation enables the derivation of clinically meaningful statistics from the output distributions, providing patient-specific insights through interactive multimedia that contribute to more informed clinical decision-making and establish a foundation for interpretable, data-driven survival analysis in oncology. We evaluate SAMVAE on two cancer cohorts breast cancer and lower grade glioma applying tailored preprocessing, dimensionality reduction, and hyperparameter optimization. The results demonstrate the successful integration of multimodal data for both standard survival analysis and competing risks scenarios across different datasets. Our model achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art multimodal survival models. Notably, this is the first parametric multimodal deep learning architecture to incorporate competing risks while modeling continuous time to a specific event, using both tabular and image data.
